---
author: Alexandre Archambault
authorURL: https://github.com/alexarchambault
title: 1.1.0-M14
---

This post describes the most notables changes of coursier `1.1.0-M14`.

## Mirrors

coursier got support for mirrors, kind of like Maven has.
Mirrors allow to substitute some repositories for others. This can be useful
with internal Maven repositories mirroring Maven Central for example. In that
case, you'd prefer requests to go to that mirror rather than to Maven
Central.

Mirrors are automatically picked from the API (unless explicitly disabled)
and the CLI.

They can be configured via configuration files, namely
`~/.config/coursier/mirror.properties` on Linux, and
`~/Library/Preferences/Coursier/mirror.properties` on OS X.
For example, these settings allow to replace Maven Central with JCenter
```
jcenter.from=https://repo1.maven.org/maven2
jcenter.to=https://jcenter.bintray.com
```

Mirrors should be described in more detail in the coursier documentation
in a later time.

## New ways of passing credentials

The CLI and API of coursier now accepts credentials via the environment,
via Java properties, or configuration files.
These are described in more detail in the
[dedicated documentation page](/docs/other-credentials).
Beware that some details may change a bit before the release of `2.0.0`
final.

## Refactoring

### Redirections

HTTP redirections are now handled by some custom code, rather than by
`java.net.HttpURLConnection`. (This introduced some regressions, now fixed
in subsequent releases.) This allows a more refined handling of credentials
when redirections happen (credentials can be stripped, or added if their
settings allow it, in particular).

This should also allow users to more finely tune whether credentials
should be sent upfront, without waiting for a 403 Unauthorized response
(to be added to the [dedicated documentation page](/docs/other-credentials)).

### Parsers

Most parsers were moved in dedicated objects under the `coursier.parse`
namespace. That includes `DependencyParser`, `ModuleParser`, and
`RepositoryParser` in particular.

### High level API

The new high level API kept evolving / getting refined.

## Fixes

### XML errors

A regression in the code handling XML, since `1.1.0-12`,
giving `SAXParseException`, was fixed.
