---
author: Alexandre Archambault
authorURL: https://github.com/alexarchambault
title: Work in progress: enforcing rules during resolution
---

This post describes an in-progress implementation of a new way to enforce
constraints during resolution in coursier.

These constraints can be, for example:
- requiring a set of modules to all have the same version, or
- enforcing that no versions of a module were "evicted", like the [strict conflict manager of Ivy](https://ant.apache.org/ivy/history/2.5.0-rc1/settings/conflict-managers.html), or
- simply forbidding the use of snapshot dependencies for some or all modules.

This mechanism shares similarities with the
[Maven enforcer plugin](https://maven.apache.org/enforcer/maven-enforcer-plugin),
but also extends it in novel ways, as we'll see.
Among others, it also allows to achieve what the
[strict conflict manager](https://ant.apache.org/ivy/history/2.5.0-rc1/settings/conflict-managers.html)
of Ivy does.

This post aims at giving users an early taste of it, and gather early feedback.

## Rules

Let's call the custom constraints one can add to resolutions "rules",
like the Maven enforcer plugin [does](https://maven.apache.org/enforcer/enforcer-rules).

A rule can do two things:
- checking that a resolution satisfies some predicates (or "conditions" or "constraints"), and
- optionally try to address things if it found its predicates do not hold.

Its (simplified) signature looks like
```scala
trait Rule {
  def check(res: Resolution): Option[UnsatisfiedRule]
  def tryResolve(
    res: Resolution,
    conflict: UnsatisfiedRule
  ): Either[UnsatisfiableRule, Resolution]
}
```

`check` checks if a resolution satisfies some predicates, and returns an
`UnsatisfiedRule` if it doesn't.

`tryResolve` tries to address the issue, and returns either an
`UnsatisfiableRule` if it can't, or a new `Resolution` (with adjusted parameters
say), from which resolution should be resumed.

## Examples of rules

The current rules implementation features 3 rules:
- `AlwaysFail`,
- `SameVersion`,
- `DontBumpRootDependencies`,
- `Strict`.

More are about to be added.

### `AlwaysFail`

This rule never checks, and its `tryResolve` method never succeeds either.
In a word, it makes resolution fail. It's there mostly for testing purposes -
for testing in coursier itself, but also to allow its users to check that their
rules are taken into account for example.

Example (with the current master of coursier)
```bash
$ coursier resolve org.tpolecat:doobie-core_2.12:0.6.0 \
    --rule AlwaysFail
???
```

### `SameVersion`

This rule ensures that several modules all have one and the same version. One
doesn't need to specify which _version_ here - only which modules.

If several of the specified modules end up being depended on, this rule
will check that they all have the same version. If they don't, the `check`
method of this rule returns an error. Its `tryResolve` method tries to address
the issue by
- selecting the highest version among those of the modules involved, and
- for the modules not already on this version, forcing them to it (by adjusting the `forceVersion` field of `Resolution`, like the `--force-version` option does on the command-line).

Example (with the current master of coursier)
```bash
$ coursier resolve sh.almond:scala-kernel_2.12.8:0.3.0 \
    --rule 'SameVersion(com.fasterxml.jackson.core:jackson-*)'
???
```

If you prefer the rule to make the resolution fail rather than trying to
address the problem, prefix it with `fail:`, like
```bash
$ coursier resolve sh.almond:scala-kernel_2.12.8:0.3.0 \
    --rule 'fail:SameVersion(com.fasterxml.jackson.core:jackson-*)'
???
```
More about `fail` (and its cousins `warn` and `try-resolve`) [below](#rule-resolution-or-not).

### `DontBumpRootDependencies`

???

### `Strict`

???

## Rule resolution (or not)

By default, if a rule isn't satisfied, its `tryResolve` method is used to try
to address that. But if a rule isn't fulfilled, one could assume that
something is wrong in the input dependencies or resolution parameters. And
it may be preferable to just fail straightaway, and let users fix things
themselves.

## Implementation state

???
